Laboratory Safety Manual | Office of Environment, Health & Safety
Office of Environment, Health & Safety
EH&S protects the health and safety of our community and environment.
Employment Opportunities
Trainings Required by Role
Areas of service and support: working with hazards, risk assessment, safety and compliance, policies and procedures, consultation and training, resources and guidance.
Construction at UC Berkeley
Controlled Substances
Environmental Protection
Equipment & Tool Safety
Heat Illness Prevention and Response
Maximum Allowable Quantities (MAQ)
Providing support, in the form of risk assessment, review, consultation, training, and the necessary resources and guidance for research at UC Berkeley.
Lab Hazard Assessment Tool (LHAT)
Labs At Berkeley (L@B)
Principal Investigators
Laboratory Managers & Safety Coordinators
Department Safety Coordinators
Laboratory Workers & Students
The campuswide Workplace Safety Program serves as the university’s central program for creating a safe and healthful work environment.
Safety by Campus Role
Work Related Injuries
What to Do in an Emergency
Workplace Violence Prevention
Automated External Defibrillators (AEDs)
Job Safety Analysis (JSA)
Secondary navigation
Report a Safety Concern
Laboratory Safety Manual
The laboratory safety manual provides an overview of lab safety procedures and policies.
Providing support, in the form of risk assessment, review, consultation and training, for research at UC Berkeley that involves the use of recombinant DNA,
biohazardous materials and biological toxins.
about Biological Safety
Campus Laboratory Safety Policies
The University of California, Berkeley is committed to providing a safe and healthy working environment for the campus community. Faculty, students, and other personnel in laboratories and other academic settings may work with hazardous materials, equipment, and processes. With regard to safety and environmental protection, this teaching, and research work is governed by state and federal regulations and University policies.
UC Systemwide Laboratory Safety Policies...
about Campus Laboratory Safety Policies
Chemical Hygiene Plan
Cal/OSHA (Title 8 CCR Sec. 5191) requires that all laboratories have a written Chemical Hygiene Plan as a fundamental chemical safety plan for the laboratory. This online resource is intended to supplement the information in the hard copy Chemical Hygiene Plan (CHP) Flipchart that includes laboratory-specific information. To obtain a CHP Flip Chart for your laboratory contact EH&S at (510) 642-3073 or
. All UC Berkeley laboratory personnel who work with laboratory chemicals must know and follow the guidance...
about Chemical Hygiene Plan
The Office of Environment, Health & Safety provides inspection and self-assessment programs that assist campus with improving regulatory compliance and increase campus awareness of environment, health and safety issues.
about EH&S Inspections
Safely working and conducting research outdoors, off-campus, and abroad. The
UC Field Operations Safety Manual
serves as a reference document and teaching tool to promote safe, successful field courses and research trips. It includes guidance on planning, training, incident response, risk...
about Field Research
Ensuring the safe use of lasers, laser systems, and non-ionizing radiation sources. How Do I:
Get authorized to use a laser? Please go to the UC Learning Center and enroll in the course titled
EHS 301 - Laser Safety
. If you have questions, contact us at
ehstrain@berkeley....
Non-Ionizing Radiation (Non-Laser) Manual
The modern world is full of devices that, either directly or indirectly, act as sources of non-ionizing radiation (NIR). These sources produce NIR in the electromagnetic spectrum of wavelengths/frequencies ranging from 100 nm to static fields. Many NIR sources are present on the UC Berkeley campus, either in research applications or in ancillary equipment. In general, NIR tends to be less hazardous to humans than ionizing radiation (ionizing radiation has a wavelength of less than 100 nm or a photon energy greater than 12.4 electron Volts). However, depending on the wavelength/frequency and...
about Non-Ionizing Radiation (Non-Laser) Manual
Radiation Safety oversees and facilitates the use of radiation sources in research and instruction; helping to ensure safety and regulatory compliance.
about Radiation Safety
Policies, procedures, and training materials for any type of shop-work activities.
Learn about the various
EH&S Safety Programs
Frequently Used Forms
about Shops and Trades
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for Labs
A standard operating procedure (SOP) is a set of instructions for performing experiments or processes that involve hazards (chemical, physical, biological, radiation). SOPs are lab-specific and include documentation of the people who have received training for that procedure.
New students and employees working in your lab should be provided with hands-on training for hazardous materials and operations that are covered by the SOPs for your lab.
SOPs by Hazard Type Chemicals & General Lab Safety
Written SOPs are required for all hazardous operations/activities. A library of...
about Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for Labs
The Office of Environment, Health & Safety maintains a Hazardous Waste Program (HWP) to develop hazard waste disposal procedures, provide orientation to campus personnel, monitor departmental hazardous waste operations, receive departmental waste and dispose of the waste, and evaluate all hazardous waste disposal activities.
about Waste Disposal
What to Do in a Campus Emergency
Emergency procedure signs are posted near the stairs and elevators in every building. These signs tell you what to do during different emergencies. They also show the location of your building’s Emergency Assembly Area.
In the event of a fire: Pull on the nearest manual pull station and call 911. Only use a fire extinguisher if you’ve been trained and the exit is clear. Contact EH&S to request fire extinguisher training. By law, everyone must evacuate the building when the alarm sounds or when directed by emergency personnel or a campus issued...
about What to Do in a Campus Emergency
California state regulations require every employer to establish, implement and maintain an effective Injury & Illness Prevention Program (IIPP). In August 2017, the University adopted a campuswide Workplace Safety Program that serves as the University’s central IIPP for creating a safe and healthful work environment. Having one program for the whole University helps to improve access, consistency, and usability across all departments. EH&S is the responsible department for overseeing the campuswide Workplace Safety Program. The campus Workplace Safety Program is based on the Injury...
about Workplace Safety
EHS 101 Fundamentals of Laboratory Safety
Equipment and Tool Safety
LEARN MORE ABOUT LAB SAFETY
We protect the health and safety of our community and environment.
2111 Bancroft Way, 4th Floor - MC#1150
Berkeley, CA 94720-1150
Commitment to Accessibility
Request EH&S information in an alternative format
Report a Website Access Issue
dial from a cell phone for campus police in an emergency (510) 642-3333
Hazardous Waste Program (HWP)
Radiation Safety Info System (RSIS)
Recharge (Formerly SRS)
Safety Training Assessment & Records Tool (START)
University of California, Berkeley
Vice Chancellor for Research
Vice Chancellor for Administration
University Health Services
Powered by Open Berkeley
Copyright © 2026 UC Regents; all rights reserved