Compliance & Regulatory Programs
EHS Management System
EHS Recognition Program
Emergency Management
Institute Committees
Working Alone Policy
Autoclave Validation Program
Bloodborne Pathogens
Decontamination and Disinfection
Biological Research Registration
Chemical Regulatory Reporting & Security
Compressed Gas Cylinder Safety
Dangerous & Highly Toxic Chemicals
DEA Controlled Substances
Gammacell Irradiator Safety
Magnets, UV & Radio Frequency
Radioactive Material Safety
Field Research Safety
Fume Hoods/Laboratory Ventilation
Hazardous Materials Shipping
Inspections: Level I & Level II
Lithium-ion Battery Safety
Toxic Gas Monitoring
Safe & Sustainable Labs (S2L)
Bio-Waste Pick-up Form
Chemical Waste Collection Form
Pollution Prevention
Rad-Waste Pickup Form
Recycling & Waste Reduction
Pipette Tip Box Pickup
Campus Design & Construction
Decommissioning & Demolition
Event & Exhibit Safety
Inflatables & Amusement Devices
Lighting, Pyrotechnics, Fireworks, Lasers, & Strobes
Crane and Hoisting Systems
Hazard Communication
Hearing Conservation
Lockout/ Tagout (LOTO)
Occupational Injury or Illness Reporting
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
Reproductive Health Protection
Order Signs & Stickers
Space Heater Use Guidelines
We provide comprehensive chemical safety services and guidance to help minimize the risks associated with the use of hazardous chemicals.
EHS provides tools and resources to maintain the safe and responsible use of chemicals in an academic research setting, in line with state and federal regulations.
Chemical Hygiene Plans template and review process
Online Chemical Inventory system
If you are working with chemicals in the lab, you may also have questions about:
To ensure the safe use of hazardous chemicals in all of our labs, we require students and employees to review and maintain Chemical Hygiene Plans and complete related training.
Understand how to identify what chemicals you need to inventory, the minimum information you are required to track, and how often your inventory should be updated.
If your lab or work area uses chemicals you must submit an annual inventory report, in support of regulations aimed at preventing the potential misuse of certain chemicals.
Review the best practices for safely storing and working with common chemicals and nanomaterials.
Best Practices for Chemical Storage
Guidelines for safely maintaining, moving, and storing compressed gas.
Dangerous and Highly Toxic
Review important considerations and regulations for working with and storing Particularly Hazardous Substances and highly toxic chemicals.
While there is no institute-wide license, researchers at MIT engaging in research with controlled substances must be registered with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration.
Office Visits 8am-5pm, Monday–Friday
Massachusetts Institute of Technology | Environment, Health & Safety Office | 265 Massachusetts Ave, N52-496 | Cambridge, MA 02139 | 617-452-3477
© 2019 MIT Environment, Health & Safety Office