Fume Hoods and Lab Exhaust – Environmental Health and Safety
Environmental Health and Safety
Find a Subject Matter Expert
Environmental Affairs
Research and Lab Safety
Find Training Courses
Personal Protective Equipment – PPE
Principal Investigator Resources
Safety Orientation Checklist
Emergency Management & Mission Continuity
Accident Report Forms
Fume Hoods and Lab Exhaust
Fume hoods are the most important engineering controls for preventing exposure to hazardous materials in laboratories. Users need to understand the proper use and limitations of the fume hood.
Each fume hood should be equipped with a flow monitor/ alarm. When the alarm sounds, stop work immediately, close the sash, and report the event to facilities liaison.
Local exhaust devices other than fume hoods including snorkels and enclosures are also utilized in laboratories for limited applications. Using or modifying these devices for exposure control or exhausting equipment requires EH&S evaluation, review, and approval.
EH&S performs annual fume hood inspections and issues work orders on the behalf of the PI when deficiencies are found. When a fume hood fails the face velocity test, it will be taken out of service and posted with a ‘Do Not Use’ or ‘Warning’ sign. Contact your facilities liaison for any questions regarding the status of the repair of your fume hood.
Keeping the fume hood sash close at all times provides both a physical barrier between you and experiment as well as energy cost reduction.
Fume Hood Information for New Projects
Building Liaison/Safety Contact Chemical Hood Reference Information (pdf)
Chemical Fume Hood Owner Reference Information (pdf)
Recommended Chemical Hood Use Procedures (pdf)
Common Corrections Actions for Fume Hoods (Letter Size (pdf) and Legal Size (pdf))
Ventilation Systems – Proper laboratory ventilation is needed to minimize exposure to hazardous materials while conducting research associated activities.
A-Z search of Website
Environmental Health & Safety Organizational Chart
Subject Matter Expert List
2024-2025 Campus Safety Award Recipients
· NC State University
· University Policies
North Carolina State University