Laboratory Security and Safety Guidelines – Environmental Health and Safety
Environmental Health and Safety
Find a Subject Matter Expert
Environmental Affairs
Research and Lab Safety
Find Training Courses
Personal Protective Equipment – PPE
Principal Investigator Resources
Safety Orientation Checklist
Emergency Management & Mission Continuity
Accident Report Forms
Laboratory Security and Safety Guidelines
Chemicals received by persons other than the end user may not be left in an unsecured (unlocked) area.
Chemical receiving areas (for chemicals not received directly by the end user) must have a receipt log that indicates the name of chemicals received and also the name of the person who the chemical is released to (a packing slip with printed name and signature of assignee would suffice).
Lab doors must be locked when labs are unattended. Hazardous material storage areas must be locked when unattended.
Visitors (those without key access) must be escorted at all times
Access for student, visiting scientists, etc is permitted only when regular employees are present (grad students may be considered employees).
Access for cleaning, maintenance and repairs should be limited to hours when regular employees are present.
Chemicals that are consumed in process, disposed, or shipped should be removed from lab inventory logs when not to be replenished. Particular attention to this inventory reconciliation should be paid to select agents and other highly toxic materials for which individual containers should be accounted for.
Certain highly toxic materials should be stored in locked cabinets, freezers, or refrigerators. This applies to sodium cyanide, potassium cyanide, arsenic compounds, select agents, and other materials which may be readily recognizable as poisons..
Emergency plans must be in place. Plans for secured areas should include means for emergency responders to gain access to the work area in the event of emergency. Tours of the work area by emergency response organizations should be considered for high hazard locations.
Laboratories containing radioactive materials and the radioactive materials stored within shall be secured.
Updated Chemical inventories must be maintained in the laboratory and submitted to Environmental Health and Safety on an annual basis with the safety plan. Particular care should be taken to properly account for highly toxic materials .
Environmental Health and Safety (env-health-laboratory@ncsu.edu) must be notified when materials listed are obtained. After the initial notification has been made, repeat orders of the same material do not require notification.
Supervisors are aware of applicable medical surveillance requirements
All persons who will be using chemicals must have attended Hazard Communication or New Employee Orientation training provided at the Environmental Health and Safety Center.
The PI must assure that all persons using chemicals have received specific training from their supervisor for these chemicals and have been trained according to the laboratory safety plan.
Applicable hazard reviews must be conducted to assure the safety of hazardous operations.
Assure proper packaging and labeling when shipping materials. For shipping guidance contact Environmental Health at 919-515-7915
Safety Related Items Needing Review or Approval
A-Z search of Website
Environmental Health & Safety Organizational Chart
Subject Matter Expert List
2024-2025 Campus Safety Award Recipients
· NC State University
· University Policies
North Carolina State University