DS Fact Sheet on Chemical Storage-Flammable and Corrosive Cabinets

National Institutes of Health (NIH) • Office of Research Services (ORS) • Division of Safety (DS) 

Laboratory Safety and Chemical Storage 

Limited laboratory space presents a challenge for the proper and safe storage of hazardous chemicals. Chemical 
segregation is critical for preventing unintentional chemical reactions between different hazard classes. Incompatible 
chemicals (i.e., those chemicals that can produce an undesired reaction if mixed) must be segregated and stored 
separately to reduce the risk of accidental mixing that can result in dangerous or violent reactions. 

Chemical storage cabinets, such as corrosive and flammable cabinets, play critical roles in chemical segregation and 
lab safety. These cabinets are designed for the specific storage of different hazard classes and should not be used for 
multi-purpose or general chemical storage. Details of both cabinet types and their applicability are discussed below. 

How to Use Corrosive and Flammable Cabinets? 

Corrosive Chemical Cabinet 

Flammable Cabinet 

Purpose: 

Purpose: 

• Provide designated storage for corrosive

• Flammable cabinets are designed and built to

chemicals.

• Vented exhaust, usually through a chemical fume

hood to remove harmful vapors.

protect the contents from catching fire in case of a
fire occurring outside and limiting any fire/explosion
inside the cabinet from spreading to the lab.

• Cabinets may come with vents; these vents
should remain plugged to contain hazardous
vapors within the cabinet.

What to store in a Corrosive Cabinet: 

What to store in a Flammable Cabinet: 

• Corrosive materials

• Flammable Chemicals

- Strong acids and bases must be stored in 
separate cabinets, space permitting, when 
utilizing large quantities.

- Small quantities of strong acids and bases can 

be stored inside the same cabinet, placed within 
secondary containment,
and on separate shelves.

- Within a designated storage area, separate 

organic acids from inorganic acids and organic 
bases from inorganic bases using appropriate 
secondary containment.

- Cabinet doors must remain closed to keep 

vapors exhausting through the vent.

- Any amount of class 1, 2 or 3 flammables over
500 ml/g and non-working stock must be
secured in an approved flammable cabinet.

- Do not exceed the listed storage capacity of

the cabinet.

- Keep cabinet doors always closed and secured
to ensure proper functioning of the cabinet.

- Flammable chemicals 

refrigeration
must be stored in refrigerators/freezers that are
explosion proof and appropriately rated for the
storage of flammable materials.

requiring 

Find additional information on construction 
requirements, installation, and location at 
NIH DTR Corrosive Storage Cabinet 

Find additional information on construction 
requirements, installation, and location at 
NIH DTR Technical Bulletin Flammable Storage Cabinets 

National Institutes of Health 
Office of Research Services • Division of Safety 
Building 13, Room 3K04 • (301) 496-2960 
Revised 03/2025 

 DS Fact Sheet on Chemical Storage-Flammable and Corrosive Cabinets

National Institutes of Health (NIH) • Office of Research Services (ORS) • Division of Safety (DS) 

Additional Considerations for Chemical Segregation 

• For chemicals with multiple hazards/multiple pictograms on the label (e.g., both flammable and corrosive), address 
the more severe hazard and store accordingly (flammable cabinet with separate secondary containment). OSHA 
details the GHS Pictograms and associated hazards on the Hazard Communication Standard Pictogram Fact Card.

• Consider having an annual chemical clean-up or inventory assessment to check the accuracy of inventory, condition 

of containers, labels, expiration dates, and confirm that chemicals are properly segregated.

• Containers that are cloudy, have illegible labels, or if there is noticeable buildup around the cap should be reviewed 
for disposal. Outer containers that are rusted or otherwise show corrosion should be reviewed and if the chemical 
inside of the container is still usable, the outer container should be discarded. Dispose all older chemical that are no 
longer in use.

• Secondary containment can be used to separate hazard classes and to contain spills/drips to prevent accidental 

mixing of incompatible chemicals.

Above (left) – chemicals in secondary containment 

Above (right) – spill trays to contain leaks or drips 

• Secondary containment should be made of a non-reactive material, (e.g., Nalgene, polypropylene plastic, or an

equivalent), and be clearly labeled with the hazard class of the contained chemicals.

• Hazardous chemicals must be kept at or below eye level and are not to be stored under the sink.

Additional information on working safely with chemicals can be found in the NIH Chemical Safety Guide. 

National Institutes of Health 
Office of Research Services • Division of Safety 
Building 13, Room 3K04 • (301) 496-2960 
Revised 03/2025