DS Fact Sheet on Managing Peroxide Formers in the Lab 

National Institutes of Health (NIH) • Office of Research Services (ORS) • Division of Safety (DS) 

What are Peroxide Formers? 

Peroxide forming chemicals are a group of chemicals that can, under certain conditions, form explosive peroxides which can be 
detonated by shock, friction, or heat. Typical molecular structure of the chemical for peroxide forming functional groups and the 
chemical families of peroxide formers are listed below: 

Organic 

• Aldehydes
• Ethers, acetals
• Dienes, vinyl acetylenes
• Ureas, amides, lactams
• Olefins with allylic hydrogens chloro- and

fluoro-olefins & terpenes

Inorganic 
• Alkali metals, particularly potassium
• Alkali metal alkoxides and amides
• Organometallics

Tetrahydrofuran, dioxane, diethyl ether, 2-propanol, and isopropyl ether are the most used peroxide formers at NIH. 

Table 1 - List of Commonly Found Peroxide Formers* 

Class A: These chemicals can form explosive levels of peroxides during storage without concentration. Test open bottles for 
peroxide formation before using or discard after 3 months. Dispose of after 12 months even if unopened. 

Isopropyl ether 
Butadiene 
Chlorobutadiene (Chloroprene) 

Potassium amide 
Potassium metal 

Sodium amide 
Tetrafluoroethylene 

Divinyl acetylene 
Vinylidene chloride 

Class B: Test every 6 months for peroxide formation following the date of opening. These chemicals are a peroxide hazard during 
storage and on concentration (distillation/evaporation). Dispose of after 12 months unless testing indicates no peroxides present. 
Test for peroxides immediately before evaporation or distillation. 

Acetal 
Acetaldehyde 
Benzyl alcohol 
Benzaldehyde 
2-butanol 
Cumene Cyclohexanol 
2-Cychlohexen-1-ol 
Cyclohexene 
Cyclopentene Diacetylene 

Dicyclopentadiene 
Diethylene glycol 
Dimethyl ether 
Diethyl ether 
Dioxane 
Ethylene glycol Furan 
Methyl acetylene 
Methyl cyclopentane 
Methyl-isobutyl ketone 
2-pentanol 
4-pentene-1-ol

1- phenyl ethanol
2- propanol *(test prior to concentration 
or distillation only)
Tetrahydrofuran
Tetrahydronaphthalene
Vinyl ethers

Class C: Test every 6 months following the date of opening. Unsaturated monomers may autopolymerize because of peroxide 
accumulation. Open bottles without inhibitors must be discarded within 24 hours. Open bottles with inhibitors must be disposed of 
after 12 months unless testing indicates no peroxides present. 

Acrylic acid 
Butadiene 
Chlorotrifluoroethylene 

Ethyl acrylate 
Methyl Methacrylate Styrene 

Vinyl acetate 
Vinyl chloride 
Vinyl pyridine 

* The list in Table 1 is illustrative, not comprehensive. Check the SDS of your chemical to determine if it forms peroxides.

National Institutes of Health 
Office of Research Services • Division of Safety 
Building 13, Room 3K04 • (301) 496-2960 
 Revised 03/2025

1 

 DS Fact Sheet on Managing Peroxide Formers in the Lab 

National Institutes of Health (NIH) • Office of Research Services (ORS) • Division of Safety (DS) 

Managing Peroxide Formers in the Lab 

Keep the inventory of peroxide formers to the minimum amount needed. When possible, obtain them with an inhibitor or stabilizer. 
Never distill peroxide forming chemicals to dryness. Always leave a minimum of 20% of the chemicals in the still.

Labeling

Storage 

Label containers of peroxide forming chemicals with the 
date of receipt, the date of opening, and date of 
expiration using a DOHS approved label. 
Periodic testing to detect peroxides should be performed 
and the date of testing/findings must be documented.

• Follow manufacturer’s storage guidelines.
• Store in airtight bottles, away from light and heat. Avoid

using glass ground stoppers.

• Store under inert gas, if possible. Although storage under
inert gas or with a stabilizer may prolong shelf-life, test
the container for peroxides before use or before any
possible distillation procedure.

Inspection 

Peroxide formers must be inspected before each use. Crystallization (around the cap or in solution), discoloration, and 
stratification (oily layer or second liquid phase) are signs of peroxide former may have become shock sensitive.
Do not move or touch the container. Call the Chemical Waste Services, your IC Safety Specialist and PI/supervisor. 
Chemical Waste Services will determine if the fire department should be called. Contact numbers: 
Bethesda: (301) 496-4710 • Baltimore: (667) 312-5762 • Phoenix: (602) 200-5308 • Frederick: (240) 236-9575 • RML: (406) 363-9212 

Testing 

Table 2 

Test open bottles of Class A for peroxide formation before every use. 
Test Class B and C every six months and prior to distillation or 
evaporation using the commercially available test strips (available 
from many chemical vendors). Commercial test strips have a test 
range of approximately 0.5 to 100 ppm. When testing for peroxide, 
use the guidelines in Table 2 to interpret results and determine action 
to take. High Hazard peroxide formers such as pyrophoric, 
water-reactive, acutely toxic chemicals, solid chemicals like 
potassium metal, potassium amide, and sodium amide should 
not be tested for peroxide formation. Only use visual signs for 
peroxide formation for those chemicals. 

Disposal 

< 25 ppm 

Considered safe for general use 

25-100 ppm 

Not recommended for distilling 
or concentrating 

>100 ppm

Avoid handling and contact 
Chemical Waste Services for 
safe disposal immediately. 

Follow the above guidelines for the disposal of each Class. If you notice any discoloration or decomposition during routine 
inspection, dispose of immediately even if it is before the expiration date. Follow NIH Waste Disposal Guide for details. 

References 

• Sigma Aldrich – Peroxide Forming Solvents Information Page

https://ehs.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/peroxide-formation-sigma.pdf

• NRC Prudent Practices in the Laboratory: Organic Peroxides and Peroxidizable Compounds

https://www.nap.edu/read/12654/chapter/7#133

• Clark, D.E., Peroxides and Peroxide - Forming Compounds, Chemical Health
• and Safety, 2001, 8 (5), 12-21.

National Institutes of Health 
Office of Research Services • Division of Safety 
Building 13, Room 3K04 • (301) 496-2960 
Revised 03/2025

2 

Table 1 - List of Commonly Found Peroxide Formers*