DOHS Fact Sheet on Cryogen Safety 

National Institutes of Health • Offce of Research Services (ORS) • Division of Occupational Health and Safety (DOHS) • Technical Assistance Branch (TAB) 

Cryogenic liquids (e.g. nitrogen, helium, carbon dioxide, oxygen and argon) and compressed gases may be used in 
laboratories and other locations for various applications and work procedures. Due to its low temperature property, 
working with a cryogen can be hazardous. 

Guidelines for safe usage of cryogenic liquids: 

• Always store cryogenic liquids in well-ventilated rooms. Cryogenic
 liquids need to release pressure as they boil off over time. 

• Only use manufacturer-rated containers which are specifcally 
designed to hold cryogenic liquid. These containers should be

 insulated, impact resistant, have handles (or secondary tray),

 and a loose-ftting lid. 

• Always wear appropriate PPE when handling
 cryogenic liquids. This includes: cryogloves, 
close-toed shoes, long pants, and safety goggles. 
When dispensing cryogenic liquids into an open
 container, face shields must be worn in addition
 to the PPE listed above. 

• Never leave the area unattended during the
 manual flling of cryogenic liquid in dewars. 

• Cryogenic liquids should be stored in the 
upright position. Avoid rolling containers 
(either vertically or horizontally), as this may 
cause pressure buildup and explosion. For 
moving cryogenic liquid cylinders, always use 
a specifcally designed cylinder cart. 

• Signage may be posted near cryogenic storage
 freezers, compressed gas storage areas, and
 cryogenic liquid dispensing stations to remind
 users of appropriate PPE and safe work

 practices. Examples of such signs may be
 found at this QR code: 

• The rapid release and evaporation of cryogenic liquids can create
 hazardous environments (i.e., oxygen defciency). The Occupa-
tional Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) specifes that a

 concentration is below 19.5% or above 23.5%.
 Please contact the DOHS Oxygen Monitoring 
Program Manager for information on the require-
 ments of the NIH Oxygen Monitoring Program. 

Safe Handling of Dry Ice: 

• Dry ice is to be stored in a well˜ventilated location and placed
 in a Styrofoam container, dry ice storage chest, or a cooler

 designed for the storage of dry ice. 

• Do not store dry ice in a tightly sealed container to avoid 

explosion due to thermal expansion. 

• Do not use or store dry ice in confned areas, walk˜in 
 refrigerators, environmental chambers or rooms without 

ventilation to avoid asphyxiation. 

If a leak is suspected, or there is a spill or 
rupture of a container: 

• Evacuate the area but have someone remain nearby at a safe
 distance to prevent the entry of others. 

• Bethesda: Call the NIH Fire Department (911 from a landline or 
(301) 496-9911 from a cell phone). All other locations: Call 911. 

• Treat any cold burns immediately by fushing with tepid water
 or placing in a lukewarm water bath. Do not try to warm the
 skin by rubbing it.

 a. Seek medical attention. 

i. Bethesda: Call 911 from a landline or (301) 496-9911

 from a cell phone.

 ii. All other locations: Call 911.

 hazardous atmosphere may include one where the oxygen 

 b. When safe to do so, notify supervisor and OMS. 

For questions regarding this reference document, please contact the Division of Occupational Health and Safety Oxygen Monitoring 
Program Manager at (301) 496-2960 or consult your IC Safety Specialist. 

National Institutes of Health • Offce of Research Services 
Division of Occupational Health and Safety • Technical Assistance Branch (TAB) 
Building 13, Room 3K04 
(301) 496-3457 
December 2023 

1