National Institutes of Health 
Laser Safety Program
2026 

Authored by the Laser Safety Officer (LSO) and Deputy LSO with additional input, 
review, and the concurrence of the Laser Safety Advisory Committee (LSAC). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………… 2 

I. 

PURPOSE………………………………………………………………… 2 

II. 

SCOPE……………………………………………………………………. 2 

III. RESPONSIBILITIES …………………………………………………….. 2 

IV. DEFINITIONS………………….…………………………..…………….. 3 

V. 

PROGRAM……………………..…………………………..…………….. 6 

VI. REFERENCES………………….…………………………..…………….. 10 

VII. APPENDICES………………….…………………………..…………….. 11 

ACRONYMS 

Division of Safety 
Deputy Laser Safety Officer 

DS 
DLSO 
IHCSB Industrial Hygiene and Campus Safety Branch 
LCA 
LSAC 
LSO 
NIH 
OMS 
ORS 
PI 
SOP 

Laser Controlled Area 
Laser Safety Advisory Committee 
Laser Safety Officer 
National Institutes of Health 
Occupational Medical Service 
Office of Research Services 
Principal Investigator 
Standard Operating Procedure 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 

Over time, the applications for lasers in biomedical research and in clinical treatments have 
grown exponentially. This spectrum is on display at NIH, with lasers in use from optical 
imaging, where super-resolution microscopy can pinpoint single molecules, to laser therapies of 
the eye, where laser treatments may help reduce the probability of vision loss in some patients. 
As the number of novel laser techniques grows, so does the number of personnel who work 
directly with or around lasers; the majority of NIH institutes use lasers. Full realization of the 
benefits of lasers necessitates their safe use by everyone. 

In Animal Research settings, lasers are prevalent in a variety of applications, from optical 
imaging to animal surgery. It is important to note that laboratory animal workers are not 
excluded from adopting Laser Safety in their workspace. Whether animal researchers are using a 
confocal microscope for imaging or performing laser surgery, the safe use of lasers must be 
applied. All animal study proposals involving laser use will be reviewed by the Laser Safety 
Officer (LSO). 

I. 

PURPOSE 

The Laser Safety Program (LSP) has been developed to provide guidance and oversight for the 
safe use of lasers at NIH. The program aligns with the American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI) Z136.1-2014 “Safe Use of Lasers”. 

II. 

SCOPE 

The LSP applies to all NIH employees, contractors, and students working directly with or 
around Class 3B and Class 4 lasers and laser systems at official NIH facilities, hereinafter 
referred to as lasers. 

III. RESPONSIBILITIES 

Laser Safety Advisory Committee (LSAC): 

a) Develop and manage the LSP. 
b) Verify safety practices and control methods by personnel using lasers. 
c) Investigate all incidents and accidents involving the use of lasers in NIH facilities; and 
d) Maintain an accurate inventory of lasers. 
The current LSAC member list can be found here: 
https://ors.od.nih.gov/sr/dohs/safety/laboratory/Pages/laser_safety.aspx 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laser Safety Officer (LSO): 

 Assist with laser hazard evaluation and verify laser equipment classification. 

a)
b) Provide and/or facilitate laser safety training. 
c) Determine required safety practices and control measures critical for the implementation of a 
laser laboratory as specified by ANSI Z136.1 – 2014 American National Standard for Safe Use 
of Lasers and compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
d) Consult on the purchase of necessary laser safety materials (signs, labels, safety eyewear, 
etc.). 
e) Monitor and enforce program requirements. 
f) Conduct periodic reviews of the LSP. 
g) Develop and conduct laser safety surveys/inspections; and 
h) Provide technical guidance to the safety specialist on site-specific laser standard operating 
procedures (SOPs) and Animal Study Proposal (ASP) that involve the use of lasers. 

Deputy Laser Safety Officer (DLSO): 

a) Assist the LSO with the performance of his or her duties; and 
b) As deputy, will carry out the duties of the LSO when authorized. 

Laser Safety Site Contact (LSSC): 

a) Supervising laser usage in a specific area (e.g., eye clinic). 
b) Acting as a liaison between the clinical laser users and the LSO. 
c) Troubleshooting equipment problems. 
d) Acting as a resource to staff members and laser users 
g) Assessing the needs for continuing education and training. 

Supervisors/Principal Investigators (PIs): 

 https://go.usa.gov/xReGv 

(accessible to users connected to the 

a) Register new lasers online at
NIH network). 
b) Identify all laser hazards and implement all appropriate hazard controls. Correct any 
unsafe or non-compliant conditions in the laboratory. 
c) Identify all personnel who may operate, maintain, or work in close proximity to lasers and 
ensure training is completed at intervals specified by the LSP and maintain records of 
completion dates. 
d) Monitor all authorized personnel for compliance with the LSP. 
e) Ensure maintenance is conducted at proper intervals to keep lasers in safe working order. 
f) Maintain a copy of this written program in the workplace. 
g) Complete a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for each laser and location (lasers which 
share substantially similar procedures and/or locations can be combined into one SOP). SOPs 
shall be kept in locations so that personnel have access before entry into a Laser Controlled Area 
(LCA); and 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 h) Report any major changes in laser operations to LSO (i.e: changes in laser set up/layout and 
laser location). 
i) Ensure assigned staff utilizing lasers and equipment with lasers review manufacturer operating 
manual, technical specifications and guidelines of each laser equipment. 

Laser Users: 

a) Know all hazards and associated procedures for the safe use of lasers in the work area. 
b) Complete required training(s) as specified by a supervisor/PI, LSO, or the LSAC. 
c) Comply with the LSP and use good safety practices. 
d) Use all personal protective equipment as specified in prescribed training or required by a 
supervisor/PI, LSO, or the LSAC; and 
e) Immediately notify a supervisor/PI, LSO, or the LSAC of any hazards encountered. 

IV. DEFINITIONS 

Accessible emission limit (AEL): The maximum accessible emission level permitted within a 
particular laser hazard class. 

Authorized personnel: Any individual approved to work with lasers by completion of required 
training(s). 

Aversion response: An involuntary movement of either the head and/or eye to avoid exposure 
to a visible laser beam. 

Blink reflex: The involuntary closing and opening of the eye(s) because of external 
stimulation. 

Collecting optics: Lenses or optical instruments that use magnification to increase the power of 
a laser beam. 

Continuous wave (CW): A laser beam with an output greater than 0.25 seconds. 

Deputy Laser Safety Officer (DLSO): One who assists the LSO in the performance of his/her 
duties to monitor and enforce the control of laser hazards and effect the knowledgeable 
evaluation and control of laser hazards. The LSO can delegate authority to the DLSO. 

Diffuse reflection: The reflection of a laser beam in many directions by a surface. 

Divergence: The splitting of a laser beam so that the beam diameter increases with distance travel. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Embedded laser: A laser of a specific class that is reduced to a lower class due to the mechanisms 
and devices (engineering controls) that remove the potential for contact. 

Enclosed laser: A laser that is contained within a protective housing itself or of the laser or laser 
system in which it is incorporated. 

Fail-safe interlock: An engineering control where the failure of a single mechanical or 
electrical component of the interlock will cause the system to go into, or remain in, a safe 
mode. 

Infrared: In this standard, the region of the electromagnetic spectrum between the long- wavelength 
extreme of the visible spectrum (about 0.7 m) and the shortest microwaves (about 1 mm). 

Intra-beam viewing: The viewing condition whereby the eye is exposed to all or part of a 
laser beam. 

Laser Controlled Area (LCA): A laser-use area where the occupancy and activity of those 
within is controlled and supervised. Walls, barriers, or other means may define this area. Within 
this area, potentially hazardous beam exposure is possible. 

Laser Safety Advisory Committee (LSAC): A group of individual members of the NIH 
community who have an inherent interest in laser safety due to their professional role, such as 
using lasers in research, laboratory management, and/or safety responsibility. The group shall be 
composed of members from all NIH ICs operating lasers and will work together with the LSO 
and DLSO to shape and execute the LSP. 

Laser Safety Officer (LSO): One who has the authority and responsibility to monitor and 
enforce the control of laser hazards and effect the knowledgeable evaluation and control of laser 
hazards. 

Laser Safety Site Contact (LSSC): The LSSC is also referred to as the Laser Safety Specialist 
(LSS). A DLSO and/or a LSSC/LSS may be designated and approved by the LSO for each area 
where lasers are being used in multiple sites in a health care organization or facility. The 
LSSC/LSS oversees the safe laser use in specific areas where a laser is used and for which the 
LSSC/LSS is responsible. 

Maximum permissible exposure (MPE): The level of laser radiation to which an unprotected 
person may be exposed without adverse biological changes in the eye or skin. 

Medical Lasers: 
Per the FDA’s definition, medical lasers are medical devices that use precisely focused light 
sources to treat or remove tissues. At NIH, laser application occurs in Ocular treatment, Ocular 
surgery, tumor ablation, and gum disease treatment. As such, the NIH LSP provides the ANSI 
Z136.3-2018 guidelines to those clinical settings. Responsible parties for guidelines 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 implementation are the NIH LSO and a Laser Safety Site Contact (LSSC) or Laser Safety 
Representative (LSR) for each site working with medical lasers. 

Nominal hazard zone (NHZ): The space within which the level of the direct, reflected, or 
scattered radiation may exceed the applicable MPE. Exposure levels beyond the boundary of 
the NHZ are below the appropriate MPE. 

Non-beam hazard: A class of hazards that result from factors other than direct human exposure 
to a laser beam. 

Optically aided viewing: Viewing with a telescopic (binocular) or magnifying optic. 

Protective housing: An enclosure that surrounds the laser or laser system and prevents access 
to laser radiation above the applicable MPE. The aperture through which the useful beam is 
emitted is not part of the protective housing. Protective housing limits access to other 
associated radiant energy emissions and to electrical hazards associated with components and 
terminals and may enclose associated optics and a workstation. 

Pulsed laser: A laser that delivers its energy in the form of a single pulse or a train of pulses. In 
this standard, the duration of a pulse is less than 0.25 s. 

Q-switch is a technique by which a laser can be made to produce a pulsed output beam. The 
technique allows the production of light pulses with extremely high (gigawatt) peak power, 
much higher than would be produced by the same laser if it were operating in a continuous 
wave (constant output) mode. 

Q-switched laser: A laser that emits short (~10-250 ns), high-power pulses by means of a Q- 
switch. 

Safety latch: A device intended to provide a measure of safety that must physically be removed 
to allow exposure to a hazard. 

Specular reflection: A mirror-like reflection. 

Thermal effect: Temperature elevation caused by exposure to a laser beam. 

Threshold limit (TL): The term is applied to laser protective eyewear filters, protective 
windows, and barriers. The TL is an expression of the “resistance factor” for beam penetration 
of a laser protective device. This is generally related to the Threshold Limit (TL) of the 
protective device, expressed in W·cm-2 or J·cm-2. It is the maximum average irradiance or 
radiant exposure at a given beam diameter for which a laser protective device provides 
adequate beam resistance. Thus, laser exposures delivered on the protective device at or below 
the TL will limit beam penetration to levels at or below the applicable MPE. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ultraviolet radiation: In this standard, electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths between 180 and 
400 nm (shorter than those of visible radiation). 

Wavelength: The distance in the line of advance of a sinusoidal wave from any one point to the 
next point of corresponding phase (e.g., the distance from one peak to the next). 

V. 

PROGRAM 

Laser Safety Program 

The NIH LSP is administered by the Division of Safety (DS) through the LSO and DLSO, in 
collaboration with the LSAC. 

The LSP was developed to conform to ANSI Z136.1 – 2014, the American National Standard 
for Safe Use of Lasers, as well as ANSI Z136.8 – 2012, the American National Standard for Safe 
Use of Lasers in Research, Development, or Testing. The LSP is supplemented with guidelines 
from other sources and is structured to ensure compliance with all applicable regulations (see 
references in section VI). 

The control measures outlined herein shall not serve to restrict or limit in any way the use of 
laser radiation of any type which may be intentionally administered to an individual for 
diagnostic, therapeutic, or medical research purposes by or under the direction of qualified 
professionals engaged in health care. However, those administering and assisting in the 
administering of the laser radiation, as well as the patient, where applicable, shall be protected 
by the control measures as outlined herein and, as applicable, by the requirements as specified 
in ANSI Z136.3 – 2018, the American National Standard for Laser Safety in Health Care. 

The LSP is also issued as NIH Policy Manual chapter 3036 – NIH Laser Safety Program. 
The manual chapter can be viewed online at https://policymanual.nih.gov/3036. 

Laser Classification 

Class 1 

1. Understood to be a non-hazardous source during usage intended by the manufacturer. 
2. Not intended to be monitored by this LSP: 

a. No surveillance or audits; and 
b. No control measures for usage. 

Class 1M 

1. A Class 1 system that may become hazardous if viewed with an optical 

instrument. 

2. Not intended to be monitored by this LSP: 

a. No surveillance or audits; and 
b. Control measures – ensure no optically aided viewing. 

Class 2 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. A laser with less than or equal to 1 milliwatt. 
2. A laser within the visual spectrum (400 nanometers – 700 nanometers). 
3. Not intended to be monitored by this LSP: 

a. No surveillance or audits; and 
b. Control measures – understood that the natural aversion response is sufficient 

to protect the eyes from damage. 

Class 2M 

1. A Class 2 system that may become hazardous if viewed with an optical 

instrument. 

2. Not intended to be monitored by this LSP: 

a. No surveillance or audits; and 
b. Control measures – ensure no optically aided viewing. 

Class 3R 

1. A laser with less than 5 milliwatts. 
2. May be dangerous from both direct viewing and specular reflections if natural 

aversion responses are not functioning properly. 

3. Not intended to be monitored by this LSP: 

a. No surveillance or audits; and 
b. Control measures – ensure no optically aided viewing, avoid direct viewing of 
the beam or its specular reflection, and avoid unattended operation where the 
beam is directed into a location where it can be directly viewed by the public 
or personnel uninformed about the hazards. 

Class 3B 

1. A laser with less than or equal to 0.5 watts. 
2. May be dangerous from both direct viewing and specular reflections. 
3. Not a fire hazard. 
4. Intended to be monitored by this LSP: 

a. Minimum of an annual survey for compliance with the LSP; and 
b. Control measures – See section V: Laser Hazard Control Measures for 

more detailed information regarding specific control measures. 

Class 4 

1. A laser with power that exceeds Class 3B. 
2. Hazardous to both eyes and skin when the beam makes direct contact or from specular 

reflection; may pose a hazard from diffuse reflection. 

3. May be a fire hazard. 
4. Intended to be monitored by this LSP: 

a. Minimum of an annual survey for compliance with the LSP; and 
b. Control measures – See section V: Laser Hazard Control Measures for 

more detailed information regarding specific control measures. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laser Acquisition and Transfer 

It is the sole responsibility of the PI to document and report to the LSO the purchase of a Class 
3B or Class 4 laser or laser system. The PI may choose to delegate this function; however, the 
ultimate responsibility for the success or failure of the reporting remains with the PI. PIs (or 
their designee) can register new lasers online at https://go.usa.gov/xReGv (accessible to users 
connected to the NIH network). 

Laser Hazard Control Measures 

Controls for Class 3B and Class 4 Lasers: 

1. Posting – At a minimum, the entryway(s) of a laser safety area shall be posted for 
the class of laser, laser power, and laser wavelength(s). Additionally, it may be 
necessary to post inside the laser safety area to further define the hazard. For 
example, in shared space, non-laser users might need further warning signage of the 
hazard. 

2. Authorization – Only individuals who have been trained by a designated official 
may utilize Class 3B and Class 4 lasers. No other individuals have the means to 
utilize the lasers. 

3. Beam trajectory and control – The laser may only be utilized after the beam 

manner is well characterized and understood. The beam should be controlled to not 
be at either standing or sitting heights. Additionally, an appropriate beam stop shall 
be utilized to terminate the beam. 

4. Non-beam hazards – All non-laser materials that have the potential to come into 

contact with the laser beam shall be analyzed to determine if any hazards are created 
upon contact over a period of time. When no written information is available to 
describe conditions created by contact, the responsible party should assume a 
hazardous product and ensure a proper means to eliminate the hazard. The most 
common means of controlling non-beam hazards is the use of local exhaust 
ventilation, essentially a mechanical means of purging an atmosphere through the 
use of controlled, directional air flow. Additional non-beam hazards are described in 
the next section. 

5. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) – All Class 3B and Class 4 laser usage 
areas shall have a written document providing the required PPE to be used while 
working with the laser. The most common PPE for use with lasers is protective 
eyewear. Eyewear must be appropriate to the laser used. All PPE shall be inspected 
before use for conditions that would negate the effectiveness of the protective 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 device. Laser safety eyewear should be properly stored to avoid damage, such as 
tearing or delamination of protective films. 

6. Containment – All Class 3B and Class 4 laser(s) and laser system(s) should utilize 

a means of containment that fully encloses the beam path and any potential 
reflections of the beam from surfaces. Building materials utilized in a laser area(s) 
should be analyzed for reflective potential, and when possible, altered to decrease 
reflectance to as low a level as achievable. Windows to spaces outside of the laser 
area should be removed or covered to block transmission of the laser. Engineering 
controls, like laser activation entry lights and key switches, should be used at all 
times to ensure effective containment and control. 

7. Rapid Egress and Emergency Access – All Class 4 laser area(s) shall have a 
controlled means of rapid egress and admittance for emergency conditions. 

8. Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) – A standard operating procedure 

document shall be established for each laser laboratory and be made available to 
personnel before entry into an LCA (see Appendix B). Submit SOPs to the LSO for 
review. 

9. Maintenance and Service of laser equipment- All Class 3B and 4 lasers, 
regardless of their set-up, should have control measures in place during the 
maintenance and/or servicing of the equipment. Appropriate signage (e.g., laser 
warning and notice for repair signs) must be posted at entryway(s) of the laser 
location. Additionally, laser personnel and workers in the surroundings of the laser 
should be informed of the maintenance in progress. If personnel must enter the laser 
location during its service, appropriate laser safety eyewear must be worn. 

Non-Beam Hazards & Control Measures 

A. Electrical Hazards – Many incidents and accidents related to laser(s) and laser 
system(s) stem not from the laser beam, but from user interaction with electrical 
components required for the laser to function. Most Class 3B and Class 4 lasers 
utilize high voltages and large capacitors, which have a high potential for electrical 
accidents. Only highly trained users should be authorized by the PIs to complete 
work involving electrical components. Any work involving electrical components 
shall comply with the NIH Lockout/Tagout procedures and guidelines. 

B. Laser Dyes – Dyes used as lasing media are often classified as toxic, 

carcinogenic, and/or flammable. These chemicals shall be handled appropriately, 
and safety data sheets (SDSs) for each shall be on file within the laser use area. 

C. Laser Generated Air Contaminants (LGAC) – Contact between a laser beam and a 
material can cause specific, yet sometimes unknown contaminants to be released into 
the atmosphere of the laser use area. Periodically, this release of air contaminants 
may occur without noticeable signs, such as the smoking of the material contacted. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Proper room ventilation or local exhaust ventilation is critical in any laser use area 
and should be evaluated before the installation of a Class 3B or Class 4 laser. The 
use of respiratory protection is not an accepted means of controlling the generated 
airborne hazard. 

D. UV and Visible-Radiation and Plasma Emissions – Evaluations for the discharge 
of radiation, both visible and UV, and plasma formation shall be completed before 
the use of a Class 3B or Class 4 laser. Identification of any of these conditions 
requires a review of the PPE used for skin protection to ensure adequate safety 
coverage. Additionally, laser and laser system components shall be periodically 
surveyed for damage from these conditions. 

Laser Safety Training 

All supervisors and users shall complete the NIH Laser Safety training before using a Class 3B 
or Class 4 laser or laser system. Completion of an alternate training class shall be submitted to 
the LSAC for approval before laser usage may occur. Retraining is required biennially, after an 
incident or accident, and as required by the PI, LSO, DLSO, or LSAC. 

As recommended, personnel working near, with, or supervising the use of Class 3B or Class 4 
lasers at NIH can choose to complete laser safety training. It is recommended to complete the 
training before initial use and every two years thereafter, per NIH Policy Manual Chapter 3036 
- NIH Laser Safety Program. Quiz records will serve as proof of completed training and will be 
maintained by the NIH Division of Safety (DS). For appropriate signage, please visit the laser 
safety webpage. If you need assistance in verifying the training status of your team, please share 
their names with the LSO, and access the training below: 

1. View the NIH Laser Safety Training 
2. Complete the NIH Laser Safety Training Quiz 

Laser Safety Survey 

A laser safety survey is completed annually for all Class 3B and Class 4 lasers and laser systems. 
Safety surveys can be completed by the LSO, an appropriately trained Occupational Safety and 
Health Specialist, or a safety survey team involving personnel from the LSAC and the laser use 
area. The laser safety survey form is attached as Appendix A. The laser safety self-reporting 
form, attached as Appendix C, is an alternate survey method that can be used periodically instead 
of the survey form. Deficiencies found will require a response by the PI or designee concerning 
modifications to make to resolve the issue. No usage of the laser(s) or laser system(s) should 
occur before the modifications are made unless the LSAC grants a written waiver to the PI. 

Medical Surveillance and Laser Accidents 

Individuals who believe that they require a medical evaluation concerning their use of laser(s) or 
laser system(s) shall request their respective supervisor. All requests will be conducted by 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Occupational Medical Services (OMS). At this time, standard annual medical evaluations are not 
conducted for NIH laser users. 

In the event of any accidents or incidents involving a Class 3B or Class 4 laser or laser system, 
the user shall immediately notify their supervisor. The user shall undergo an immediate 
evaluation by OMS located on the sixth floor of building 10, Room 6C306. The phone number 
for OMS is (301) 496-4411. 

Specific Laser Equipment Guidelines 

Embedded lasers: pieces of equipment that may contain “embedded” lasers are 

• Confocal 
• TIRF microscopes 
• Two-photon microscopes 
• Cytometers 
• Mass Spectrometers 
• Laser Cutters 

These systems also have interlocks to prevent accidents due to beam exposure. If interlocks are 
bypassed, exposure or injury may occur. Additionally, once the enclosure is removed, the risk of 
injury becomes higher. At that point, it is important to remember to treat these systems as open 
beam lasers equipment. It is required to restrict access to the laser location during the 
maintenance and/or servicing of such laser equipment. The NIH LSP maintains records of these 
systems if they contain a Class 3B or 4 power. However, signage, PPE, and training requirements 
may vary based on laser safeguards. 

VI. REFERENCES 

ANSI Z136.1-2014, American National Standard for Safe Use of Lasers 

ANSI Z136.3-2011, Safe Use of Lasers in Health Care Facilities 

29 CFR 1910.132, Personal protective equipment 

29 CFR 1910.133(a), Eye and face protection 

STD 01-05-001, (OSHA) Guidelines for Laser Safety and Hazard Assessment 

21 CFR 1040.10, Laser Products 

21 CFR 1040.11, Specific-purpose laser product 

HHS Publication FDA 86-8260, Compliance Guide for Laser Products 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 VII. APPENDICES 

Appendix A: Laser Safety Survey Form 

Appendix B: Laser Safety General SOP 

Appendix C: Laser Safety Signages

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 

NIH LASER SAFETY PROGRAM: APPENDIX A 

PI 

IC 

SOP(s) Written? YES NO 
LASER INFORMATION 

Manufacturer 
Serial # 
Medical Laser? YES NO Hazard Class 
Notes: 

TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 

Lab Manager 

Campus/Bldg/Room 

SOPs Available? 

YES NO 

Model 
NIH Asset Tag # 
1 1M 2 2M 3R 3B 4 

Type 
Power(s) 
Equipment Grounded? 
Alignment Done In-House? 
If Yes, Additional Safety Procedures Established? 

Wavelength(s) (nm) 
Pulsed 
YES NO 
YES NO 
YES NO 

Energy (J): Length (s): Rate (Hz): 

If Yes, Describe 

Notes: 

ENGINEERING AND ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROLS 

Warning Sign 
Visible? 
Key Control? 
(On/Off Switch) 
Complete 
Enclosure? 
Notes: 

YES NO 

YES NO (Required for Class 
4) 

YES NO 

PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EYEWEAR 

Warning System 
Type(s) 

Audible Light Verbal 

Protective Housing? YES NO 

Barriers,Curtains, 
Beam Stops, Etc.? 

YES NO 

Manufacturer(s) 

OD @ λ 

CERTIFICATION 

Follow-Up 
Required? 

Signature 

Model(s) 

YES NO 

Surveyor 

Date 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NIH LASER SAFETY PROGRAM APPENDIX B: GENERAL SOP 

REMINDERS: 

- Lasers shall only be operated by authorized personnel who have completed training; and 
- Laser users must periodically read and always follow the SOP. 

ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 

PI 

IC 

Phone # 

LASER USE AND PROCEDURES 

Laser Use 

Length of Use 

Medical 
Research 
Ongoing 
Limited 

Type of Research 

Specify Limited Use 

List Step-By-Step Procedures for Laser(s) System(s) Use 

Lab Manager 

Campus/Bldg/Room 

DOHS #s 

TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 

Description 

Individual Laser Commercially Embedded Laser System Custom-Built Laser System 

Beam 
Characteristics 
Reason for Incomplete Enclosure 

Fully Enclosed Partially Enclosed Open Beam Located Between Sitting & Standing Height 

Alignment Done In-House? 

YES NO 

If Yes, Additional Safety Procedures Established? 

YES NO 

If Yes, Describe 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ENGINEERING AND ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROLS 

Windows Covered 

YES NO N/A 

Only Anodized, Dull, Non-Reflective or Matte Finished Instruments Used Near Laser Site 

YES NO N/A 

Watches and Reflective Jewelry Removed or Covered Prior to Operating the Laser 

YES NO N/A 

Grounded 

Rapid Egress Paths Established 

Restricted Room Access 

Barriers, Curtains, Beam Stops, Etc. 

Key Control (On/Off Switch) (Required for Class 4) 

YES NO N/A 

YES NO N/A 

YES NO N/A 

YES NO N/A 

YES NO N/A 

Laser Key Returned to Secure Storage When the Laser Is Not in Use 

YES NO N/A 

Fail-Safe Interlock(s) 

Safety Latch(es) 

Fire Extinguisher Available 

Warning Signs Posted on All Laser Room Entrance Doors 

Emergency Contact Information Included on Door Warning Signs 

YES NO N/A 

YES NO N/A 

YES NO N/A 

YES NO N/A 

YES NO N/A 

Warning System Type(s) 

Audible Visible (Illuminated) Verbal 

PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EYEWEAR 

Clean and Without Scratches 

Stored in Case(s) When Not in Use 

YES NO N/A 

YES NO N/A 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Optical Density and Wavelength Range Markings Visible 

YES NO N/A 

Optical Density Needs Verified (Online Calculator: https://www.lia.org/evaluator/od.php) 

YES NO N/A 

Number of Pairs 

Location Kept (Room) 

Manufacturer 

Model 

OD @ Wavelength(s) 

CERTIFICATION 

Responsible Person 

Signature 

Date 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 APPENDIX C: LASER SAFETY SIGNAGES 

DANGER 

Class 4 Laser Controlled Area 

Laser Eye Protection Required: 

OD ≥ @ nm 

EMERGENCY CONTACT(S): 
NIH LASER SAFETY OFFICER: (301) 496-2960 

REQUIRED: This sign is required to mark the entryway(s) of areas containing Class 4 
lasers with high (multi-kilowatt) output power or pulse energies with exposed beams. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 REQUIRED: This sign is required to mark the entryway(s) of areas containing Class 3B or 
Class 4 lasers (choose the highest-class laser present in the area). 

19 

 
 
 
 
 REQUIRED: This sign is required to mark the entryway(s) of areas containing Class 3B or 
Class 4 lasers (choose the highest-class laser present in the area). 

20 

 
 
 
 
 OPTIONAL: This sign is optional to mark the entryway(s) of areas containing Class 3B or 
Class 4 lasers (choose the highest-class laser present in the area). This sign is specific to fully 
enclosed laser beam equipment (e.g.: some confocal microscopes) and does not require laser 
safety eye protection. 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 OPTIONAL: This sign is optional for use to mark the entryway(s) of areas containing 
Class 2, Class 2M, or Class 3R lasers. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 REQUIRED DURING MAINTENANCE: This sign is required to mark the entryway(s) of 
areas that are temporarily for the repair or servicing of a Class 3B or 4 laser equipment. 

23