Chemical Safety | UW Environmental Health & Safety
GENERAL HEALTH & SAFETY
Assembly and fire permits
Capital safety projects
Regulated building materials
Emergency procedures
Surveys and inspections
Air operating permit
Pollution prevention
Soil and groundwater
Report wildlife sighting
Biosafety for research
Bloodborne pathogens
Caution and warning signs
Biological materials
Defibrillators (AEDs)
Radiation producing devices
Respiratory protection
Hazardous energy (LOTO)
Shops and maker spaces
Safety plan templates
Chemicals are used in laboratories, maker spaces, shops and other areas across campus. We provide information and guidance on safe practices for handling, storing, transporting and disposing of hazardous chemicals.
Environmental Health & Safety Contact
Last Updated: January 27, 2026
Compressed Gases and Cryogens
Hazard Communication
Safety Data Sheets (SDSs)
Shipping Hazardous Materials
Chemotherapy & Hazardous Drugs
Treatment and Recycling
Particularly Hazardous Substances
Chemicals are used in laboratories, maker spaces, shops and other areas across campus. Environmental Health & Safety (EH&S) provides information and guidance on safe practices for handling, storing, transporting and disposing of hazardous chemicals.
Visit the Biotoxin Safety page to learn how to safely handle biotoxins and for details about regulatory oversight for certain biotoxins.
Chemotherapy and Other Hazardous Drugs
Compressed gases and cryogenic fluids
Formaldehyde, Formalin, Paraformaldehyde, Safe Work Practices
Guidelines for Peroxide Forming Chemicals
Nanoparticle Research
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
EH&S provides guidance and information for the safe management of specific chemicals. If you are seeking information about a specific chemical, compound or category that is not listed, please contact EH&S for a consultation.
Chemical Hygiene Plan
UW personnel and students are required to follow a Chemical Hygiene Plan when working in areas where chemicals are present.
Laboratories use the UW Laboratory Safety Manual and standard operating procedures (SOPs) as their Chemical Hygiene Plan.
All other workspaces where chemicals are present follow the requirements of the Chemical Hazard Communication Program.
UW Laboratory Safety Manual
This manual establishes safe procedures and practices to protect personnel from chemical hazards in the laboratory.
Chemical Hazard Communication
Chemical hazard information for all workplaces is described on the Chemical Hazard Communication page.
Standard operating procedures (SOPs)
A standard operating procedure are step-by-step instructions to help personnel perform specific tasks and work processes, ensuring consistent quality and compliance with safety standards and best practices.
If you operate a chemical laboratory, you must have standard operating procedures (SOPs) that describe the safety measures for using, storing, and disposing of chemicals in your lab.
Visit the Chemical SOPs page for templates and a list of required elements you can refer to when developing your SOPs.
Environmental Health & Safety provides the following resources for University personnel working in areas where chemicals are present.
If you transfer a chemical into a secondary container, it must be labeled correctly to ensure workers are aware of its contents and hazards associated with the chemicals.
Be prepared to respond to an exposure or other emergency.
A fume hood (or biosafety cabinet) is used when working with toxic compounds to prevent exposure to chemical fumes.
Use MyChem to record and update your chemical inventory, exchange chemicals with other users, and download the safety data sheet for a specific chemical.
Get instructions to prepare for a spill and create a spill kit.
Determine the required and recommended personal protective equipment.
Safety dispose of chemical waste by requesting a chemical waste collection.
Emergency response and reporting incidents
Call 9-1-1 in an emergency.
If a spill occurs, follow the instructions on the Hazardous Material Spills page.
if an exposure has occurred, follow the instructions on the Exposure Response Poster.
UW personnel are required to submit an incident report to Environmental Health & Safety for any work-related event that results in an injury, illness, exposure to hazardous materials, or fire, regardless of the work location.
UW personnel are highly encouraged to submit work-related near-miss events. Visit the Incident Reporting page for more information.
University of Washington
© 2025 UW Environmental Health & Safety | Seattle, WA | 206.543.7262 | ehsdept@uw.edu