Put Waste In Its Place

There is no magic waste fairy 
 (at least that we know of).

Real people handle what 
you dispose of here.

Do Not Place the Following Items 
in Metal Biomedical Waste Carts

• Chemicals, chemical waste or empty chemical bottles
• Aerosol cans
• Needles not contained within a needle box
• Surgical equipment
• Other large metal items
• Unautoclaved state registered BSL-2/BSL-3 agents
• Pathological and chemotherapy waste
• Unabsorbed free liquids
• Radioactive waste
• Normal lab trash
• Broken glass
• BSL-3 waste

Laboratory Waste Disposal Procedures

Biomedical Waste 
Write the name of the Principle Investigator and lab room 
number on the side or top of the medical waste collection 
container before placing it in the metal cart.

Radioactive/Chemical Waste (including aerosol cans)
Visit ehs.yale.edu for forms.

Needles With or Without Syringes, Razors and Scalpel 
Blades 
Dispose of in a needle box and place the closed needle box 
in metal biomedical waste cart.

State-Registered BSL-2 Waste
Collect in a red bucket or needle box. Sterilize or disinfect 
(e.g. autoclave) locally. Place in metal biomedical waste 
cart.

Pathological/Chemotherapy Waste
Collect in a Stericycle box and label with “pathological 
waste” sticker.

Normal lab trash (wrappers, clean gloves, etc.) 
Dispose of in the normal trash. 

Broken Uncontaminated Glass 
Place in any cardboard box and label as “broken glass” for 
removal by custodial services. 

BSL-3 Agents 
Auotclave in laboratory and place in a Stericycle box.

More Information

Most biomedical waste generated at the School of 
Medicine is treated on-site through Environmental Health 
and Safety’s autoclave shredder. The above procedures 
are necessary to comply with Connecticut law, protect 
you and waste handlers and to prevent needlesticks, leaks, 
damage to the autoclave shredder and environmental 
harm. 

These procedures apply to the laboratories at Yale’s 
medical school campus. 

Please contact Environmental Health and Safety at 
203-432-6545 or visit ehs.yale.edu for more information. 

Do the right thing.

Yale Environmental Health & Safety ehs.yale.edu 

Rev. 4/16